---
layout: post
title: "Notes on \"SCALE-Sim: Systolic CNN Accelerator Simulator\" from Samajdar et. al."
---

I'm reading this paper
  with these goals:

- I want to understand when multiple systolic arrays make sense. It must depend on the workload. What kinds of workloads benefit? And what's the strategy for running them on multiple systolic arrays? Do we parallelize a single layer, or do we run multiple layers at once?
- I'd also like to understand what the design space of dataflows looks like. I've been having this thought that that's where the real design space is, and that it might be an interesting place to explore software--hardware codesign.

> We provide the first open-source, cycle-accurate DNN accelerator simulator based on the systolic-array architecture.

This
  is surprising to me!

When it comes to memory:
  larger means more power/area,
  but could be worth it
  when there's a lot of reuse.
Smaller
  means more spilling to DRAM
  depending on the workload,
  which might actually incur
  more DRAM activity,
  and thus, power.

> SCALE-SIM is a simulator that provides a publicly available modeling infrastructure for systolic array CNN accelerators. SCALE-SIM enables designers to quickly iterate over and validate their upcoming designs with respect to the various optimization goals for their respective implementation points.

So they're selling this
  (at least partly)
  as a tool/infrastructure paper.
A feeling I've been having
  is that, with hardware,
  it seems very difficult
  to build abstractions
  that will work for everyone,
  which is exactly what you need to do
  if you're going to build a flexible
  simulation framework.
So I'm excited to see how they do it!

The
  "convolutions and matrix multiplications
    are 90% of CNN inference"
  statistic
  apparently comes from
  the Eyeriss paper.
Good to remember,
  as I'm sure I'll need it someday.

Reading
  their description
  of systolic arrays
  led me to a question
  that I can't believe
  I haven't asked:
  are GPUs implemented with
  systolic arrays?
My assumption is no,
  but I'm unsure on what the differences
  are.
My guess is that
  the individual processing units
  are more complicated,
  in a GPU,
  and the network between units
  is not fixed,
  like that of a systolic array.
Oh,
  and the data reuse/data movement aspect
  of systolic arrays
  is central to their design
  (in fact,
  it's where their name comes from!)

Reading this
  reminds me of a core research
  idea of mine:
  nothing in hardware matters
  without the workload.
The workload defines
  exactly what is run.
So the fact that
  the workload
  does not drive design
  even more directly
  than it currently does
  is shocking.
Workloads do drive design.
Architects profile workloads
  to make decisions.
But the fact that that loop
  isn't tighter
  and more automated
  is the perplexing thing.

Output stationary: each PE handles
  a single output.
Rows are assigned
  to channels,
  that is, one row contains outputs
  from the same channel.
I'd guess
  that implies
  that columns are spatial?

I'm more familiar
  with weight stationary
  because it's what we use.

Unsure when input stationary
  makes sense,
  compared to weight stationary.

> When the convolution operation is formulated as successive dot-product operations, three reuse patterns are immediately evident.
>
> - Each convolution window uses the same filter matrix, to generate pixels corresponding to a given output channel
> - The adjacent convolution windows share portions of the
>input matrix if the stride is smaller than window dimension
> - To generate a output pixel in different output channels, different filter matrices use the same convolution window.
>
> In short there are spatial, temporal and spatio-temporal reuse patterns in CNN inference.

I like how
  straightforward
  this description is.
It makes
  the dataflow designs
  pretty obvious.
Yet
  it's important
  not to let the simplicity
  of this list
  convince you that these are
  the _only_ possible dataflows.
Eyeriss's
  row stationary
  exploits multiple
  of these reuse patterns.

Double-buffering:
  there's a working set
  and an idle set.
Working set
  is actively used,
  while the idle set
  is being loaded into.

They make
  a great point
  about contemporary work
  ignoring system integration concerns.
I will take their word for it,
  only because
  it was easy enough
  for _us_
  to ignore system integration concerns.
They model
  system behavior
  as the behavior as seen
  over the system bus:

> SCALE-Sim allows for modeling the main memory behavior by generating accurate read and write bandwidths of the interface, which can then be fed into a DRAM simulator eg. DRAM-Sim2.

I'm still a bit confused;
  does SCALE-Sim
  generate an estimate
  for the bandwidths _needed?_

> SCALE-Sim internally takes an inside out implementation approach. Specifically, the simulator assumes that the compute units are always used to the maximum possible utilization---as dictated by dataflow mapping, and never stall waiting for data.

This is
  interesting.
Scott does something
  similar to this as well.

SCALE-Sim
  works the following way:

1. SRAM read traces are generated, assuming that there are no stalls for reading data.
2. Because systolic array operation is predictable, output traces (i.e. SRAM write traces) can be generated once we figure out the input/read traces.
3. Given the read and write traces and the SRAM configuration (e.g. the size), the DRAM traces can be determined.
4. Finally, DRAM traces can be used to estimate power and bandwidth requirement.

They note
  how they validate
  against an RTL model;
  I'm unsure
  how much value
  to assign to that,
  given that they could simply
  have designed their simulator
  around the RTL design.

Skipping some sections
  to get to results.

> In a glance it seems, Output Stationary(OS) outperforms the other two dataflow in every aspect. However, it might be worth noting that implementing a stall free OS hardware might not be trivial.

I think
  they have a sentence
  somewhere
  arguing why
  the fact that their tool
  assumes no stalls
  (which isn't realistic)
  is okay.
But sentences
  like the above sentence
  make me doubt it!

<style>
.emphasized1 {
  color: #0041e9;
}
.emphasized2 {
  color: #936500;
}
</style>
> We performed an experiment to explore the tradeoffs between the two approaches *[scaling up vs scaling out; monolithic vs spatial]*. We start from an 8x8 array (64PEs) and increase the number of compute elements to 16384, multiplying by 4 in each step. For scaling-up each step corresponds to doubling the length and breadth of the array, while for scaling-out each step is just quadrupling the number of 8x8 arrays. For the purposes of this case study, **we divide the workload for scale-out along the output channels,**{:.emphasized1} i.e., the different filters are assigned to different nodes thus different nodes generating different output channels. Alternate partitioning strategies exist, and **in fact the best strategy may differ from layer to layer**{:.emphasized1} depending on the number of filters vs channels. **We do not add any arbitration or bandwidth constraints**{:.emphasized2} on the interconnect connecting the arrays in the scale-out mode; instead SCALE-SIM’s outputs for SRAM read bandwidth requirement determines the bandwidth requirement for this interconnect. *[emphasis my own]*

The first two
  emphasized phrases
  tell me
  that I'm not going to learn much
  about scheduling
  from this paper.
It seems like
  they choose a static scheduling decision
  which they even admit
  may not be optimal.
Unfortunately,
  that's what I need to learn;
  I need to understand
  how complex
  the space of schedules
  may be.

I interpreted
  the third emphasized phrase
  as saying that
  they don't factor in an overhead
  from a theoretical
  on-chip network
  connecting the systolic arrays
  in the scale-out case.
I could go either way on this;
  I don't know much
  about on-chip networks
  for accelerators,
  and I could believe equally
  that a network would add
  a constant overhead
  (and so, can be ignored)
  *and*
  that the network adds
  a complex
  and non-negligible
  overhead,
  but one that is hard to determine,
  so ignoring it
  was an engineering decision.

---

After talking with Joseph,
  I reflected
  that the "scale out"
  evaluation
  might have been a little more fair
  than what I first thought.
If the design they are assuming is
  some number of 8x8
  systolic arrays
  which are fed activations
  and weights
  simultaneously,
  compute simultaneously,
  and then write their results back
  simultaneously,
  without actually needing
  communication
  between systolic arrays,
  then perhaps any overheads being ignored
  would apply equally to all systolic arrays
  and thus
  ignoring them is okay.
However,
  even in this very simple setup
  this could easily not be the case:
  if some systolic arrays
  can reuse data
  from one timeslot
  to the next,
  but others cannot,
  then the overheads
  are presumably not the same
  over all systolic arrays
  in the timeslot.
I don't know,
  honestly!
It does suggest
  even more strongly
  that I need to try and compile
  a `conv2d`
  for multiple systolic arrays
  by hand.

---

## Reflecting on Reading Goals

My goals were:

> - I want to understand when multiple systolic arrays make sense. It must depend on the workload. What kinds of workloads benefit? And what's the strategy for running them on multiple systolic arrays? Do we parallelize a single layer, or do we run multiple layers at once?
> - I'd also like to understand what the design space of dataflows looks like. I've been having this thought that that's where the real design space is, and that it might be an interesting place to explore software--hardware codesign.

Regarding
  the first goal.
This paper
  *does* contain data
  about where multiple systolic arrays
  work,
  which I should dig into
  more deeply.
However,
  I had concerns
  about just how far
  into the results
  we should read.
Specifically,
  the way they simulate
  multiple systolic arrays
  is by simply assuming
  that all systolic arrays
  are 8x8.
Furthermore,
  they don't seem to consider
  on-chip network overheads;
  I'm unclear on whether
  they just don't exist,
  or whether they were safe to omit,
  or whether they were
  unsafe to omit.
I'm hoping other papers
  (e.g. MAESTRO)
  will get into this.

Regarding
  the second goal---understanding
  the design space
  of dataflows.
They laid out
  the types of sharing
  that exist,
  fundamentally,
  when considering
  the `conv2d` algorithm.
This was useful,
  as it directly leads
  to input/weight/output
  stationary
  dataflows:
  the design points
  at the three extremes.
Then,
  the question is,
  is there an interstitial space
  of design points
  between those three extremes?
The existence
  of the row stationary
  dataflow
  suggests the answer is yes.
A next step here
  would be to understand
  the three dataflows at the extremes
  plus row stationary
  and see if they can all be represented
  in some unifying framework
  which might then allow
  for the expression of new dataflows.
