---
layout: post
title: Winter Scene in Orange and Blues
permalink: /winter-scene-in-orange-and-blues
date: 2018-09-21
---

*The small house is surrounded by other small houses, in a suburb on the
hills outside the city on the coast. The colors for this story are the
faded, grayish blues of a winter evening's sky and the orange of sodium
spotlights and streetlamps.*

There's snow on the ground, packed down, and more snow is falling
tonight. My dad stands in the driveway---one of those faded, once-beige
concrete driveways with narrow channels running width-ways across its
surface. Once, the channels cut the driveway into perfect rectangles. In
ten years, though, freeze-thaw cycles have cut cracks so jagged and wide
across its surface that time itself is the only believable culprit.

My dad stands in the driveway, in the orange light cast from the lamp on
the neighbor's house. A fence separates our properties, but not because
we want to keep anybody out; without the fence, there\'s this unstated
thought that the houses could slide even closer together. As it is, my
dad still can\'t get it down, backing out of the garage into the narrow
driveway and cutting hard enough to miss the fence. Without the fence,
my dad might\'ve put the car through the side of their house instead, in
one of his half-asleep, early morning commutes. This is all just to say
that the side of the neighbor\'s house---and thus, the lamp---is no less
than ten feet from where my dad stands, and about ten feet up, and so it
shines on him like a spotlight.

Snow falls through the light, and probably everywhere else. Chunky
flakes in diagonal trajectories. They give the cone of light its shape
around my dad, standing there in the driveway, shovel at his side. He's
in his red winter jacket, one of those retro jackets that\'s in style
nowadays. Yet he doesn\'t wear it for style; he\'s had it for twenty
years. He\'s in his red jacket and his brown corduroys; he looks young,
and he is young.

The light shines around and past him, down through the window well, into
the basement where I stand, my back against the boiler for warmth. In
the orange light, he\'s little more than a silhouette. He\'s leaning on
a snow shovel, and smiling down at it. That ridiculous, goofy smile. He
may have just remembered something funny---something he\'ll want to tell
me about---but more likely, he doesn\'t even realize he\'s smiling.
I\'ll catch him from time to time, wearing that stupid smile, and I\'ll
smile too.

His head blocks the light, illuminating flyaway hairs like little
glowing filaments. He needs a haircut. I could trim it for him, but I\'d
rather send him to his stylist. It\'s easy to make him smile, but she
makes him laugh. I\'m rooting for her.


<br/>

It's Friday, but nobody will be going anywhere. Nobody will be leaving
this snowstorm. That\'s not to say we won't see anyone tonight---the
neighborhood will be about. With nowhere to go, the snowstorm draws us
to open spaces, long rooms, picture windows; it draws us out, to
porches, driveways, sidewalks. We\'ll pretend it\'s to shovel, to plow,
to sweep the snow off the steps.

Tonight, for us, the world won't exist outside of these few square
blocks. Newscasters will read off minor accidents and traffic backups;
camera crews will chase salt trucks. All of them will rather be home. In
a few hours, cable'll go out to most of the city. They\'ll queue up a
night\'s worth of automated programming and head home, each to their own
block, to their own snowstorm. By the time they arrive, we\'ll already
be out here, shovels and plows abandoned for sleds and snowmen.

I tap on the window pane to get his attention. The glass rattles in its
old wooden frame, warped from years of swelling. The window well is
filling with snow; in half an hour, it\'ll be completely full.

He sees me, and I wave. I can see his mouth start moving, only stopping
when he realizes that I can\'t hear him over the mellow roar of the
boiler. He gives a sheepish look, and I smile. Seeing my grin, he tries
to turn it into a laugh with a little jig featuring the shovel, but he
immediately slips and falls. By the time I get out of the basement and
into the driveway, he\'s picked himself up and is back to shoveling. I
grab a shovel and help him out.

Already, I hear kids laughing and playing. In the street, a pack of them
runs past, a motley of sleds in tow. Behind them follows their parents,
carrying a set of traffic cones. They wave, and we wave back.

Later, we\'ll join them at the big hill down the block. Much later, I
know I\'ll miss this. ◾️

---

<br/>

*Written between 2016 and 2018.*

